[THEME MUSIC]
>>GEORGE NOORY: He's a professor
of physics at Michigan Tech.
He has worked with NASA.
His name is Robert Nimeroff.
And welcome to "Beyond Belief."
>>NARRATOR: He has been
a guide to the stars
for millions of people.
Robert Nimeroff works at NASA's
Goddard Space Flight Center
before becoming a physics
professor at Michigan
Technological University.
He conducts research and sky
monitoring and cosmology,
among other topics.
Robert is a co-creator
and co-editor
of the Astronomy Picture
of the Day website, which
delivers images of the galaxy to
an average of a million viewers
per day.
Robert discusses the wonders
of space and its mysteries
today on "Beyond Belief."
>>NOORY: But welcome
to the program.
>>ROBERT NEMIROFF: Thank you.
>>NOORY: It's good
to have you with us.
And what a fascinating
area that you work in.
There's nothing more exciting
than-- to me-- space.
Since I was a little kid a
member of a telescope club.
And I would go out in
my Detroit winter days,
20 degrees out at night,
looking at the stars.
And I will always remember
when I put my little four inch
refractor telescope on
Saturn and actually saw
the rings around that planet.
And I was hooked ever since.
So it must be
fascinating for you, too.
>>NEMIROFF: I've been interested
in astronomy and space
since I was little, too.
I was given a four
inch telescope.
I think it was three
And I couldn't look
at it from the outside
because we used
to take it outside
and I had an old
English sheepdog.
And the old English
sheepdog would not
stay away from the telescope.
I couldn't point it--
>>NOORY: It kept
knocking it over.
>>NEMIROFF: Yeah.
It kept knocking me.
And he was so happy about
everything being outside at
night.
But then I reset
it up in my room.
And I've always been
interested in space.
I've always been interested
in reading newspaper articles
and watching NASA on TV.
I've been so lucky.
I consider myself so lucky
to be a part of that now.
>>NOORY: And then Jupiter.
You could see there are four
of Jupiter's many moons.
Those things popped out.
It was truly remarkable.
And then I was a
little disappointed
in looking at Mars,
only because I
expected to see little green
men hobbling around the planet.
But I was never
able to find them.
>>NEMIROFF: Yeah.
You can see the bands,
with a small telescope,
you can see the
bands of Jupiter.
And you can slightly see
different shaded regions
on Mars.
But it's not as spectacular
as some of the NASA images.
So NASA sends like spacecraft
to Mars, and with really high
resolution, amazing stuff.
So you're not going to see
that with a small telescope.
As long as you know
that, it's really cool
to think that you can
see the orange color.
Through a really good telescope,
you can see the ice caps.
It's just amazing that you can
see this with your own eyes.
>>NOORY: Are we at
a point now where
the theories of
planetary evolution, how
they were formed, how
solar systems were formed,
that it's pretty
accurate or are we
still learning some
dramatic things?
>>NEMIROFF: Well we
know many things.
But it's a very rapidly
changing science,
because we've
discovered-- humanity,
through many missions,
have discovered
many exoplanets, planets
orbiting other stars,
only in the past 10, 20 years.
Before that, they
were just speculation.
And as we've discovered
some, we just
realize that things are slightly
different than we thought.
They're not completely
But different mechanisms
and different ways
that planets move around
different systems and even that
bears back to our
own solar system,
how our own solar system formed.
As we learn about
other solar systems,
we learn about our own.
So you might say it's a
revolution in thought,
but much of the physics
was there already.
We just know how it
applies better now.
>>NOORY: Why is
though-- because I'm
convinced that you knew and
I knew as boys-- that there
were other planets out there.
We knew this.
Of course, science
never found it.
But it's backing up
things that we suspected.
How did we know that as kids,
because we had that feeling?
>>NEMIROFF: Because we
watched "Star Trek."
And they went there.
And it just seems reasonable.
And you know the space
community knew it too.
NASA knew it or
they wouldn't have
spent so much money trying to
look for these kinds of things.
They were pretty sure there
were planets out there orbiting
other stars, or they wouldn't
have spent so much money trying
to find them.
It would have been a bigger
story if they didn't find any.
Like oh, my god, this is
the only solar system,
the only planetary
system around.
So that makes even less
sense than discovering
lots of planetary systems.
>>NOORY: Can we assume
that almost every star
might have planets around
it or is that not the case?
>>NEMIROFF: I think most stars
that have planets around it.
>>NOORY: Most of them do.
And we're talking about
billions of stars.
Right?
>>NEMIROFF: Yes.
Yes.
There is lots of stars
in the night sky.
Thousands you can see, and
with a telescope millions,
and with big telescopes
out in space, billions.
Yeah, pretty much all
of them have planets.
>>NOORY: And the complexity
of what's out there
in the universe is the same.
I've always called it
the primordial soup.
So the elements that you find on
this planet-- gold and hydrogen
and oxygen-- I think
these elements are all
over the place in the universe.
>>NEMIROFF: Absolutely.
We see these elements.
These elements absorb
certain colors of light.
So when we look at nebula,
when we look at distant stars,
we see the exact
same elements that we
see absorbing things in the
laboratory here on Earth.
They have the same patterns of
absorption in distant stars,
in distant nebula.
So we know there's nitrogen and
mostly hydrogen and helium out
there.
And in fact, when quasars were
discovered-- maybe 50 years ago
or so now-- there were
some strange lines
they didn't understand.
And they realized that these
were regular hydrogen lines,
mostly, but the quasar was
moving away so quickly,
we were so far away, that
that's why it put them
in regions we don't understand.
And here's another cool thing.
We look at the sun
and you would think
that we would understand
all the absorption lines,
all of the-- the sun has what's
called continuum radiation.
It's mostly-- well,
it appears white,
but it's mostly yellowish green.
But there's all these
absorption lines
where these relatively cool gas
in the atmosphere of the sun
absorbs things.
You would think we would
know what all of them are.
>>NOORY: We don't do we.
>>NEMIROFF: We don't know
what all of them are.
There are some elements in
the sun that-- or something
in the sun, just small amounts
we're pretty sure that we're
not yet able to identify.
We can identify most of them.
So we're on the right track.
And some of them are probably
some complex molecules
that we didn't think might
be there in that abundance.
But we don't know them all.
Science is a frontier.
We're always expanding
that frontier.
Science is not a
textbook that you read
and you know an answer.
And that's it, we're done.
There's always a frontier.
We're always going
out and finding more.
We didn't even
know helium existed
till we saw it in the sun.
And then we found it
here on the Earth.
So there's always a frontier.
>>NOORY: This quest, as human
beings that we undertake,
to explore the moon,
to send rovers to Mars,
to send other objects out
beyond Pluto, this obsession
that we have, what
are we looking for?
What are we really
trying to answer here?
>>NEMIROFF: Well, I
think we're trying
to understand a couple things.
We're trying to understand
our place in the universe.
how we came to be,
as best we can, with
physics involved.
And we're trying to
understand dangers to earth.
Like is there
something that's going
to happen that could
be dangerous to us
that we don't know?
So all of do combine, I think.
In my view, we're in The Golden
Age of space exploration.
We've got satellites, robotic
satellites, orbiting Mercury.
Japan has one around Venus,
many around the Earth, Mars, now
Jupiter with Saturn
with Cassini.
We've had New Horizons
go past Pluto.
It is just a golden age of
solar system exploration.
And even in the past
few years, we've
discovered all these
exoplanets, too.
So the knowledge of the
universe, of planets,
has just exploded in
the past few years.
And it's really a golden
age of exploration.
And we're fortunate
to live through it.
>>NOORY: Just a few weeks ago
they discovered another planet.
>>NEMIROFF: Amazing.
>>NOORY: That was
they say, earth like.
>>NEMIROFF: Amazing.
Well, we don't know
if it's earth like,
but we know that it's in the
right place around the nearest
star.
The nearest star is
Proxima Centauri.
OK?
It's in the Alpha
Centauri system.
Proxima Centauri is
too much more red
and dimmer than the sun.
But Alpha Centauri I think
it's B, it might be A,
is similar to the sun.
But Promixa Centauri
has a planet
that they discovered just a
few weeks ago called Proxima B.
And it is in the zone where
it can house liquid water.
But we don't know all
that much about it.
We don't know, it might
have to be spinning,
it might have to
have an atmosphere.
It might not be hospitable
beautiful for life.
But it's like 4 and
1/2 light years away.
If there is some kind of
intelligent life there,
theoretically, we could
exchange messages with it.
And this was just
discovered this year.
>>NOORY: How old it it?
Do we know?
With us being 4 and
1/2 billion years old,
how old would they be?
About the same?
>>NEMIROFF: We have
no way of knowing.
It's again part of
this great frontier.
Probably--
>>NOORY: It should be about the
same, though, don't you think?
Because it's not that
far away from us.
>>NEMIROFF: Are you
talking about to the life,
whether life developed?
See life developed
probably because
of a bunch of coincidences.
And when those coincidences
occur could be almost any time.
But when did the planet form?
The planet formed probably
around the same time.
>>NOORY: As we did, right?
>>NEMIROFF: As we did.
>>NOORY: Exactly.
And then way out
into the universe
were planetary systems
and star systems
that formed much earlier?
What's the evolution
of a system?
How long does it take?
From the moment this
so-called big bang
occurred, which we'll
get into, how long
does it take for a solar
system to literally blossom?
>>NEMIROFF: Well, first of all,
this is not my research area.
So I teach astronomy, and
so I know some things.
But as Jerry and I would
joke, sometimes we're
only about two slides
deep on things.
So I might hit the
edge of my knowledge.
There are solar systems, though,
being formed like right now.
There are stars being
formed in nebula.
Star formation is ongoing.
The first burst
of star formation
occurred well earlier
in the universe
and probably produced
such massive stars
that planets wouldn't do
very well around that.
But then there was a
second generation of stars.
And probably planets
did well around them.
When those planets formed?
Probably when
those stars formed,
which is 5-10 10
billion years ago.
So there have been
quite a lot of time
for planets to form around
stars in the universe.
>>NOORY: What do you find as
a physicist, Robert, to be
the most fascinating
aspect of what you work for
and what you're looking for?
>>NEMIROFF: I don't know,
it's a big candy store to me.
I feel so lucky to be in there.
I like, geez-- I wasn't
prepared for that question.
I like to think about
the universe as a whole,
and wonder what it
was like in the past,
and what's going to happen in
the future of the universe.
I wonder how common
life is in the universe.
That's a big question with me.
>>NOORY: Like us?
>>NEMIROFF: Yes.
How unique are humans?
I wonder-- yeah, those are
two of the big questions.
>>NOORY: And what about the
beginning how it all started?
I have a difficult time
comprehending the Big Bang
theory.
It's very difficult for
anyone to explain it to me.
Or on the radio
show, Coast to Coast,
I've had many
experts on, Robert,
and I just can't get
that right answer.
Because to me, I
think of something
that begins-- meaning that there
was nothing before that-- so I
don't understand
how could this be.
>>NEMIROFF: Nobody understands.
We only go back so
far-- physicists
can only take us back so
far before we pick it up
and say OK, starting
at this epoch,
we can start to pick
up what's going on.
The temperature must
have been about this.
And these kinds of nuclear
elements must have formed.
And then, these things must
have happened for the universe
to be like it is today.
But humanity can
only go back so far.
All knowledge has an edge.
Science isn't as it
is in its textbook,
where we look up
at the Big Bang.
We can go back to maybe about
10 to the minus 3 seconds
after it seems like
something happened.
If you just extrapolate back
from things moving away.
If you move things back to
each other and then say OK,
once it gets down to
that small and that hot,
we don't know what happens.
Nobody knows.
Could the universe
have come from nothing?
Don't know, it's a speculation.
>>NOORY: And what nothing?
>>NEMIROFF: It's a lot
of fun to speculate.
But science--
>>NOORY: It will drive you crazy
trying to get those answers.
>>NEMIROFF: It drives us
to try to find the answers.
It's one of the drivers.
That's why there
are so many people
trying to find the answer,
trying to launch satellites,
trying to analyze cosmic
equations that drove Einstein.
It drives a lot of people.
We want to know.
But we can't know everything.
All we do is we push back the
time that we understand the Big
Bang a little bit earlier
and a little bit earlier.
I, myself, have given
up hope that we're
going to push it to zero.
We're never going
to go back that far.
We're just going to
understand a little bit more
and a little bit more
incrementally as we go.
>>NOORY: I mean can we
explain what nothing is?
What is nothing in the
scope of the universe?
>>NEMIROFF: Yeah, so
nothing is a loaded term.
It means something
to do physicists.
to other people.
People used to think
the vacuum was nothing.
But then people
realized that there
were all these quantum states
that are inherent in vacuum.
And it's possible that out of
one of these quantum states,
there could have been a
fluctuation out of which
the universe developed.
But no one knows that for sure.
So even analyzing nothing
is a loaded question.
Sometimes when you look
at like simplest stuff,
you find the most
interesting stuff.
Like if you were to
look out in space
and not look at something--
don't look at a star.
Don't look at a galaxy.
Just look at blank space.
You think, we'll
that'd be boring,
but that's absolutely
fascinating,
because you see
galaxies way back
to when galaxies were near,
when galaxies were just forming.
So staring at empty
space told us a lot.
Thinking about nothing,
you would think, well
what do you have to
think about nothing?
There's nothing there,
nothing to learn.
But that's not true.
There's lots of things.
When you eliminate
everything, what's left over
can be really interesting.
It can be quantum fluctuations.
It could be particles that are
acting in ways we didn't know.
They could be formed
Bose-Einstein condensates
or things we didn't even know.
So eliminating things
and just looking
at what's left over,
although it might
be a definition for
nothing, is actually
a door to try to
figure out what's
going on in the universe.
>>NOORY: One of the most
fascinating pictures
I've ever seen from space,
taken by Hubble, where they just
took a glance at the
darkness of space,
and when you looked
at the picture,
there were hundreds and
hundreds of galaxies,
not stars, but galaxies
with billions of stars.
>>NEMIROFF: It's called
the Hubble Deep Field.
>>NOORY: Unbelievable.
It's in your book.
>>NEMIROFF: And it
was so interesting.
They went back and they did the
Hubble Ultra Deep Field now.
And they do the
Southern Deep Field
And then they keep looking--
>>NOORY: It's endless.
>>NEMIROFF: You're right.
And so that's part of the
reason why the James Webb Space
Telescope will be
launched in another year
to look even further back.
And one of the things
that James Webb will do
is he'll look at
seemingly empty space,
and see what faint
galaxies are really there.
What faint stuff
is really there.
>>NOORY: It's amazing.
It truly is.
And now they talk about
the other universes,
the multiverses.
Is that a possibility?
>>NEMIROFF: OK.
So multiverses gets
you into something
that-- the kind of
science that I like
is what's called
falsifiable science.
You have some
scientific theory that
makes specific predictions.
And then you try to see if
those predictions are true.
If the theory is a good
theory, it predicts things.
It can be falsified.
It can be shown to be false.
Even if it's shown
to be true, it
can also be shown to be false.
If the theory can't be
shown to be true or false,
then it might be
really interesting,
but it's not science
by some definitions.
So the multiverses,
they're very interesting,
but the people who
think about multiverses
have yet to make a
prediction that can really
be tested as true or false.
So currently, it's not
mainstream science.
It's really fun to think
about, but it's really
not mainstream
science in my opinion.
>>NOORY: And it's kind
of hard to imagine
these bubbles of universes
all intertwined and connected.
To me there's one universe.
That's big enough
for everything.
>>NEMIROFF: If
people can come up
with very specific predictions--
and there have been some tries.
There have been people
thinking that if you
look at the microwave
background radiation.
So if you look in the--
microwave heats your coffee.
That radiation comes to
us from all directions.
It's really amazing.
And you look at the
details of that.
And you see it's not
completely smooth.
There are little bumps on that.
From little bumps
on that, we can
learn about the very early
universe that put the bumps
there gravitationally.
Some people think
that if there were
some kind of other
universes, they
would have left traces on
the microwave background
that we could have seen.
So there have been people
looking at the microwave
background, and
nothing falsifiable
has ever been found.
It just hasn't been found yet.
So right now, it's just really
fun speculation, not verified.
>>NOORY: Do you think, just
based on odds and statistics,
that there are other planetary
systems with beings like us
all over the place?
>>NEMIROFF: It's really fun
to speculate about that.
And it's something that's
somewhat falsifiable,
because we send out messages
hoping to hear a return.
And now with Proxima B, we can
beam it right at Proxima B.
Although the chances are that
they would hear and say oh,
look, Earth's calling, let's
call it phone back is probably
pretty small.
But we can test
things like that.
I would say there probably are.
>>NOORY: Probably many.
>>NEMIROFF: Probably.
Yeah and so you
get into what's is
called the Tipler Conjecture.
If they're out there, how come
they haven't come visit us?
How come we don't see them yet?
>>NOORY: Maybe they have.
>>NEMIROFF: Maybe they have.
But all the people
who said they have,
when you check into
the detailed stories,
that they're not
falsifiable stories.
They don't they
don't always pan out.
They don't come up with
here, this is true,
check it in this way and we
check it, oh, yeah you're
right that's where.
It just doesn't work out.
We would love for
it to work out.
We just don't have the evidence.
We just don't have it.
>>NOORY: One of NASA's
most popular websites,
Robert, is called APOD.
Tell me about that.
>>NEMIROFF: So I used to work
at NASA's Goddard Space Flight
Center in Greenbelt, Maryland,
and I had an office mate Jerry
Bonnell, Dr. Jerry Bonnell.
And we were investigating,
we had a group there
that would investigate
gamma ray bursts.
And we were involved in
something called the Science
Support Center for gamma rays.
So there was something
called the Compton Gamma Ray
Observatory-- a
lot of facts here--
and so when people wanted to use
the data from the Compton Gamma
Ray Observatory, we might
become involved in advising them
on ways to do that.
But we would also do research
into gamma ray bursts
because these were
these huge explosions
and we didn't know
where they were.
But we were officemates.
And we became friends.
And so about once a year,
the leader of our group,
[INAUDIBLE] would go off
and create a summer place
where he would retire to.
And so we were sort of left
alone with all these computers,
like "Home Alone"
with NASA's computers.
So we would have fun.
So one year what
we did is-- so I'm
going to do a little
story-- so on year
what we did is we got into the
debate about random numbers.
So I looked over
at Jerry and I said
I can create the perfect
random number generator.
He said no way.
There's no way you can do that.
I said here is what it is.
It's the difference, it's the
digits of irrational numbers.
He says they're not
random because you can
predict exactly what they are.
I said yeah, but
if you didn't know
that, you didn't know it was
exactly pi or square root of 2,
they'd be random.
He'd say well, OK, maybe
but how random are they?
And then we got into this
really interesting line
of thought that goes like this.
Is there a difference
between perfect knowledge
and perfect randomness?
You would think well there's
every difference in the world.
It's completely different.
But let's say you went to the
library and you started taking
out the first book you saw and
the first letter's a, so you
put 01, b 02.
And you encode that entire
book in just numbers 26 for z,
right?
So then you get this
really long number.
And that number
encodes the book.
So now do the next book
and do the next book,
and the next one, until
you get this really, really
long number.
Now, there's a lot of
repetition in that number.
Generally, the two digit
numbers don't go past 26.
So the numbers are
aren't used efficiently.
So let's say oh I'm
going to compact that.
I'm going to use instead of just
doing zero to 26, one to 26,
I'm going to have
a more compact way.
And we're going to
shorten this a little bit.
And so this stream that
looked very nonrandom,
because there was never
anything above 50,
now it starts to
look more random.
And as you compact this data
stream, more and more and more,
it begins to look
more and more random.
And yet all the knowledge of the
library is in that data stream.
And so we started
thinking, wow, this
is kind of fits the "Beyond
Belief" theme of this show.
It's like sort of real,
but it's beyond belief.
Could all of this
knowledge of the universe
be encoded in like
the digits of pi?
Like it's some kind of
universe encyclopedia?
So we said well, let's look.
So we decided to try to
get the digits of pi.
And there were
people at Columbia
who computed lots
of digits of pi.
And we asked them, send
us your digits of pi.
And they wouldn't do it.
They wouldn't even
respond to our email.
>>NOORY: Why not?
>>NEMIROFF: They were looking
for their own non-randomness.
They didn't want
us to look for it.
So we decided to
do other things.
We decided to look for a
square root of 2 with a number
that's-- what number
squared gives you two?
It's the square root of two.
And also there's a
number, Euler's number,
e. e, it turned out, was
really easy to calculate
comparatively.
So we generated lots
of digits of that.
In fact, we didn't
know it at the time,
but we set the world record
for computing digits of e
during that time.
>>NOORY: That's why you guys are
the physicists and we're not.
>>NEMIROFF: It was kind of fun.
We would have like the Olympics
of different algorithms.
And we would test them.
And then we would
test them to see
if there's any
repetition, if there's
anything nonrandom there.
Are the digits of
e really random?
If they are, then we can
use them in our algorithms.
Because when you do
simulations of the universe,
you need random numbers to help
you generate random processes.
But if they're not, then
we've made a big discovery.
So we thought it was win-win.
We looked through that and we
couldn't find non-randomness.
>>NOORY: So now, with all
that, what did you do,
put it on this website
that we're talking about?
>>NEMIROFF: We
have a website now.
And that's called
the digit warehouse.
And if you want to know
like several million digits
of square root of
two, five, e, you
can just go there
and download it.
It was done in 1994.
And at time, 10 megabytes was
enough to freeze your computer.
>>NOORY: So to a layman,
if you want to download it,
what do I do with it?
>>NEMIROFF: You click on it.
And then it comes
in and you save it.
So a layman just
looks through it
and tries to look for patterns.
Like ooh, is that an alien?
No.
Like you try to
print it out in rows.
And you scroll it buy
and you try to see.
And your eye picks up all kinds
of stuff, but when you test it,
we can't find any
significant non-randomness
to the digits of e or the
square root of numbers.
But it was fun to
kind of look for that.
So that's what we
did one summer.
>>NOORY: You could
literally find out
if there's extraterrestrial
life out there based on numbers?
>>NEMIROFF: Well, as Carl Sagan
did in the movie "Contact,"
he had one of his characters
look in the digits of pi.
And then after many random,
seemingly random digits,
then it got down to a 0000100.
And it started giving a
grid, which was a circle.
And that was in Carl
Sagan's book "Contact."
I don't know if
it made the movie.
Actually, we didn't
know that at the time
we were searching for these.
But yeah, there could have been
some universal message encoded
in digits or irrational numbers.
>>NOORY: They could
have been coming
in from all over the universe.
>>NEMIROFF: But
we didn't find it.
If it was there, we
would have told you.
I would be famous by now.
I would come and told
you personally, George.
>>NOORY: Because people say
that you folks from NASA
would never tell us anything.
>>NEMIROFF: NASA's
actually a very open.
That's punching
some of my buttons.
So in my view, NASA is like one
of the most famous-- so first
of all, disclosure.
I get money from NASA to
run the NASA Astronomy
Picture of the Day, which
is translated into--
>>NOORY: Who picks the picture?
You do?
>>NEMIROFF: Jerry Bonnell
and I pick all the pictures.
>>NOORY: OK.
Which you've got illustrated in
your book, "The Universe 365."
>>NEMIROFF: Yes so
we have come out
with two books, that here's
one of the books, "The Universe
in 365 Days."
>>NOORY: Still great
pictures, by the way.
>>NEMIROFF: So these
are printed out.
You see resolution
on the screen,
but if you really
want high resolution,
if you want to put
it up on your wall,
then you can buy the book.
And there's a companion
book, to it, another book.
So one year, we did
square root of new digits.
And then the next year, Jay
went out to do his ranch
and we sat around and we said,
well, here we are home alone
again, and we notice
that at this point
the internet was really strong.
And the worldwide
web was coming up.
And people were
saying, oh, you've
got to see this worldwide web.
And I said, well, I
don't another program.
Who needs that?
So I looked at it and I slowly
became convinced that wow, this
is really something.
And so NASA had a high
bandwidth connection to the web
back then.
And so we said, what can we do?
We were fortunate to be
able to sit here and have
a tremendous connection like a
modern connection back in 1996.
So we decided that
we were getting
all these email
attachments, look
at this great image,
a lot of people they
didn't know what the image was.
It's really colorful.
I don't know what that is.
Now may times, NASA will
give a press release,
but sometimes the image
was somehow separated
from the press release.
So we decided one
thing we can do
is we can try to make the
web into an intelligent web
where you see something
that is explained as opposed
to a stupid web
where people just
see something they
don't say, and they
say oh wow, that was amazing.
I don't know what that is.
So this is our attempt to
make the web a little bit more
intelligent.
So we decided to take pictures
that were being sent around
and post them, one a day--
>>NOORY: Oh and you get like a
million hits a day, don't you?
>>NEMIROFF: Yes.
>>NOORY: That's amazing.
>>NEMIROFF: Now outside of
the main nasa.gov domain,
we are the most
popular site at NASA.
And we have social media.
So you can find us on Facebook
and Twitter and Google+
and Instagram.
And people who translate
us into other languages,
they do it because
they're really interested.
They just love these pictures.
They love the idea of NASA.
And they love the idea of
exploring the solar system
and understanding our earth
and our surroundings better.
And so these people.
They're volunteers.
They all volunteer.
We don't have enough money
in our budget to pay them.
But they do it because
they're just so interested.
And that's why I think NASA
is one of the most popular--
it's a relatively small
part of the US government.
It's a half of a percent of
the budget of the US government
budget, but it's like
the best known abroad.
If you go abroad you
say NASA, it's like wow,
we can't do what NASA did.
We can't put people on the moon.
We can't fly a
spacecraft past Pluto.
It's just legendary.
The worldwide appeal of NASA is
very strong, and deservedly so,
in my opinion.
>>NOORY: Robert,
some of the pictures
that I've seen of let's say Mars
that sent back by the rovers,
clearly you can see some objects
there that are very strange.
Whether it looks like
a petrified reptile
or a rat or a fossil
or the head of a robot,
is that just an usual
rock formations?
What the heck are those things?
>>NEMIROFF: In a word, yes.
These are rovers.
So if we saw
something like that,
we'd send the rover
out and look at it.
But if you look at
any stream of images--
so if we were to
take your smartphone
and we were to go through
and find your family's
get together or
your birthday party.
I know you had a big
birthday party, recently,
happy birthday.
We could find somebody
in the background
that looks like an
alien in his underpants.
Does that mean there was really
an alien in his underpants
at your birthday party?
No.
Turns out it was just
some guy doing something.
Those are much more common to
have these false alarms than
to actually have an alien show
up at your birthday party.
So if you have lots
of images of Mars,
you're going to get some things
that look a little strange.
And we've memorized
all these icons
in our life of books and
people and things like that.
And so we naturally
see these icons.
Because way back, if
you could identify,
if you could see an icon of
a lion, you would survive.
And if you couldn't see
it, you might not survive.
So our brains are just
tremendously powerful computers
of picking up icons.
>>NOORY: But those
people, though,
those experts who look
at those pictures,
do they sometimes go
wow, what is that?
>>NEMIROFF: Sure, all the time.
>>NOORY: Oh, they do?
OK.
>>NEMIROFF: Oh, yeah.
And then they try
to come up with
a logical, falsifiable
explanation using
common physics for what it is.
Extraordinary claims require
extraordinary evidence.
So it's probably just if
you look at enough rocks,
some rocks are going
to look strange.
If we go out to the parking
lot and look at rocks,
we could find an odd one.
Does that mean that it
was an alien put it there?
No.
Not in my opinion.
We can find a
conventional explanation.
And only when you run out of
conventional explanations,
in my opinion, should you go to
the conventional explanations.
And we haven't run out of them.
These are rock formations.
>>NOORY: It sure would be great
to know, though, that there
was something up there, right?
>>NEMIROFF: It would be great.
It would just be unbelievable.
And so NASA is
spending money to try
to find planets like
the Earth because it
would be so unbelievable.
NASA's spending money
to try to send out
communications and listen for
communications through SETI.
Haven't found it yet.
Maybe we'll find it.
So, it's such a great
question, we're trying.
But it wouldn't be really
responsible to report
that we have found it.
We're not trying to
cover anything up.
We'd love to say we found it.
It'd be a great story.
Just haven't found it.
>>NOORY: Why do so
many people so sinister
about government,
about NASA, thinking
as if you know
everything already,
you've got a secret
space program,
you don't want to
tell us anything.
Why do they think that?
>>NEMIROFF: I'm not sure.
That gets into
psychology of people.
I do know I've worked at NASA.
And it was a fun place.
People feel very
privileged to work at NASA.
When you work at NASA you get
paid only not in only in money,
but in prestige.
We're not people
trying to figure out
how to deceive the public,
our morale is really high.
How could our morale
be so high if we
sit around trying to
deceive people all the time?
We're trying to figure out
how to explore the universe.
what's the next logical step?
What kind of spacecraft could
we need that would help us?
If there was fossilized
life on Mars,
what spacecraft might do that?
If there was an intelligent
civilization out there,
what spacecraft do
we need to see that?
Things like that.
We're trying.
We're trying as best we can.
>>NOORY: What drives
me nuts are people who
say we never went to the moon.
That drives me nuts.
I mean we've lost astronauts
trying to get to the moon.
We have had hundreds
of thousands
of people working
under these programs.
How could they say
we faked all that?
>>NEMIROFF: It gets them press.
The privilege of being-- if
someone has a point of view,
you can then appear on
the stage and appear
to have an equally
valid point of view
if you present the
other point of view.
And then it looks like
it's 50/50 between the two.
Sometimes it's that.
I'm actually not
prepared to debate that.
There are people who
study that very strongly
and they are able to rebut
every argument specifically.
I strongly believe
we went to the moon.
I think it's one of the greatest
things humanity has ever done.
It's one of the greatest
things the United States has
done, that NASA has done.
We went to this orbiting-- this
body that orbits the earth.
It's just amazing.
It's fantastic.
And we should be proud of it.
And most people are.
And they well should be.
>>NOORY: I was friends with
the late Edgar Mitchell.
He was on Apollo 14.
He went to the moon.
I believe the guy when
he told me the stories
that he went to the moon,
that he actually was
there, and walked on the moon.
I don't think he was
lying to me at all.
And I think once people get
a better understanding of who
these individuals
were, what they did
and the dramatic things
they did for this country,
and risking their
lives to do it,
I think they'd get a better
perspective for that.
>>NEMIROFF: Let's hope so.
>>NOORY: Yeah.
You put up some videos,
too, on the APOD website.
>>NEMIROFF: Yes.
>>NOORY: And one, I
want to go through.
I want to look at it.
It's a rocket booster
coming back to the planet.
But people don't
know what it is.
It's kind of neat.
Let's take a look.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
-Whoa.
That is so cool.
-What?
-Dude.
-It's a meteor shower.
It's a meteor shower.
[SIDE CONVERSATIONS]
[LAUGHTER]
-Oh, my gosh, that's so cool.
[END PLAYBACK]
Tell me about that trail.
What was happening?
>>NEMIROFF: Well this
was a Chinese rocket
booster that was falling back
to Earth a few months ago.
And so people just
happened to be outside.
What's interesting is that we're
monitoring the night sky more
than we ever have before.
And that night was soon
after Pokemon Go came out
so people were out with
their smartphones in Utah.
And they just happened
to have their smartphones
outside chasing Pokemon
monsters, I guess.
And then, it's so easy just
to move and look and see
something.
So we actually have
some really good video
of this rocket breaking up.
And you could tell it's
not a meteor, generally
because the rocket parts
are moving so slow,
and because they've spanned
out and make up a larger cloud.
But this is what happens
sometimes if you're just
out with your smartphone.
You can catch some
amazing things.
And some of the pictures
that we have on APOD
are just by people in the right
place at the right time that
just happen to get the right
picture or the right video.
And you know--
>>NOORY: It's
timing, all timing.
>>NEMIROFF: It's timing,
a lot it is timing.
Now with Hubble, you
can point at something
and be sure you're going
to get something good.
But sometimes, it's the
person with the smartphone
in the right place at the right
time that gets the best images.
>>NOORY: Let's take a
look at a Pluto flyby
and see what we have there.
>>NEMIROFF: This one
we need NASA for.
>>NOORY: This is cool.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
So what are we looking
at here, Robert?
>>NEMIROFF: OK.
So this is THE New
Horizons spacecraft
is approaching Pluto.
And now we're seeing Pluto in
detail for the first time ever.
And so this is a time lapse.
So now it's going around.
And now, you're seeing
the Pluto and the sun
as it goes off in the distance.
And I think there are
actually lines drawn
on where the moons are there.
So Pluto before last year
was just this fuzzy blob
in the sky.
>>NOORY: Yeah.
>>NEMIROFF: First
it was a planet.
Then it was a dwarf
planet, by official name.
>>NOORY: Now that it's
a planetoid, right?
It should be a planet.
Look at it.
>>NEMIROFF: But it
is a fascinating body
regardless of what you call it.
And we didn't know
almost anything about it
before last year.
So again, the
frontier has moved.
And what we understand about
the solar system has moved.
The goalposts have moved.
And we now are trying
to figure out--
Pluto was a lot of surprises.
Its surface was really strange.
It had these smooth regions.
It had these bumpy regions.
It had a clear boundary
between the two.
It had relatively
few impact craters--
>>NOORY: Is there
frozen water there?
>>NEMIROFF: Well, there
might be a little bit
misting on the mountains.
I'm not an expert on Pluto.
But we think that there is
some frozen water there.
But there's also other frozen
nitrogen, for instance.
Things that you don't
generally find in liquid
form here on Earth.
But it's so cold on Pluto,
you can find it there.
We think there might
even be, we think,
these bubbles that
are bubbling up,
not of water, of
relatively frozen liquid.
It might be nitrogen-- I
might be getting that wrong--
and we had no guess
that this was happening
on the surface of Pluto.
And so it helps us to understand
what happens on our own planet
by seeing planetary dynamics
on something else like Pluto.
And it's just fascinating.
>>NOORY: Well and
planetary scientists
are beginning to
think that there could
be another object beyond Pluto.
Right?
That they're finding
more and more things?
>>NEMIROFF: So there's
speculation about Planet Nine,
sometimes it's called.
Right now, it's speculation.
>>NOORY: We call it Planet X.
>>NEMIROFF: Or there
certain areas of the sky,
so one thing is there's these
missions-- not missions,
they're not space
missions necessarily,
they're ground
based missions that
are looking in parts
of the sky for rocks
or distant objects that move.
So we've found a
lot of objects that
are about Pluto sized
that are further
out in the solar system.
And we think there
might even be one
that's larger than that
that's a little bit further
out than Pluto.
But we haven't seen it yet.
And right now, it's on the
fuzzy edge of speculation.
But it is sort of
falsifiable science,
because people are
predicting roughly
where to look and roughly
how massive it would be.
It's just that we
haven't found it yet,
so it's still speculation.
>>NOORY: I think
we will find it.
>>NEMIROFF: Let's hope.
I think is a lot of stuff
out there, a lot of Pluto
sized objects out there
that we haven't found yet
and in the next few
decades, we will.
>>NOORY: If there's
one question you
would like answered about
the universe, just one,
what would it be?
>>NEMIROFF: Oh boy, um.
Oh, boy.
>>NOORY: That's a toughie.
>>NEMIROFF: That's a
real tough question.
I don't know.
I just have so many and I chase
a lot of these in my research.
One question, what would it be?
How does the universe work?
Are there more fundamental laws
that are operating in some way
that we don't yet know that
can be a lot of use to us?
That would be-- and if so,
what are those simple laws?
How can we use them?
How can we use that
to help us better
understand the
universe around us,
better find energy
sources that we can use?
So one specific version of
that is what is dark energy?
So we pay astronomers
and astrophysicists
to tell us about the universe.
And it turns out, we don't know
what much of the universe is.
We only know of the 5% that is
made of matter like you and me.
There is something
called dark matter that
is some kind of matter that
gravitates like you and me,
but it's not like you and me.
It doesn't glow like you and me.
But it's out there.
And then there's like 75%
just discovered-- again
the frontier is moving.
The research frontier is moving.
We're learning so much
about the universe.
Much of the universe is
about 70% or so of something
called dark energy.
We don't know what
dark energy is.
It's like 1,000 years ago.
They knew there was air,
because they could feel wind.
They could see leaves
flutter around.
And they didn't think air was
all that important, maybe.
But now, we know
a lot about air.
We know that air is made of
oxygen that keeps us alive,
nitrogen which
helps plants grow,
planes can fly through the air.
It's tremendously important
to know about air.
Yet try and explain that
to someone 1,000 years ago.
It's like no, I'm not sure.
Now, we know there's
dark energy out there.
We know almost nothing about it.
>>NOORY: We will one day.
And when we do, we may answer
some of these questions
that we're trying to find.
>>NEMIROFF: It could be it.
It could be just an oddity that
never turns out to be useful.
It could turn out to
be tremendously useful.
And those who know about it
are tremendously advantaged.
It's open research.
We know it's there.
There is verifiable
evidence that we
see in certain different ways
of astrophysical observations
that it's there.
We don't know what it is.
>>NOORY: Robert, thanks for
being on "Beyond Belief."
>>NEMIROFF: Thank you very much.
>>NOORY: I really appreciate it.
I know my question would be if
I got that one question would be
how could something be
created from nothing?
Give me that answer.
Somebody.
Thanks for watching
"Beyond Belief."
[THEME MUSIC]